This is side number three.
Picking up on the comments about the cooperation
between Arizona and California on the interstate
highway location, I think that was perhaps one of
the highlights of the effort because there were
some sharp differences of opinion about freeway
location. as felt in the local community. These
didn't seem to have to do too much with the often
cited problems of accessibility to the freeway.
It was more a matter of what property might be
adversely affected and things of that sort. The
other factor, though, that actually was a major
factor on the California side in the location of
the freeway was the fact that the lower Colorado
River Indian Reservation, lay directly across
the Colorado River from the city of Yuma. And it was
necessary for the California Highway Department
to go through part of the Indian Reservation with
the interstate highway. There was also a town of
sorts, a village, directly across to the north of
downtown Yuma, which caused part of the problem,
and there were some very sharp differences of
opinion amongst the Indians as to whether or not,
because of certain treaty situations, they
should even allow a federal agency or a state
agency to come in and preempt part of their land.
And the feelings ran pretty high. In fact, so high
that in a few years earlier, when one of the members
of that tribe, while working for the post office in
Yuma, had risen to the position of the assistant
postmaster, the tribe disowned him because he was
working for the federal government. And they saw
the federal government as being an enemy, if you
would, of the tribe. And so they would not have
anything to do with him. He was literally shunned
by the rest of the tribe because of the position.
That was near the close of the time that I was in
Yuma. I was there from,
let's see, 1958 to 1962.
One of the things, though, that was of extreme
interest to me during 1959 and into 1960 was that I
had a man by the name of William Wisner of the ISNER,
who was from Michigan, had moved down. His wife was
working for the county extension office as a home
demonstration agent. And he was picked up on a
release time by the city and county to direct the
census operations in the southern part of Yuma
County. The planning department became very much
a part of the effort in making a lot of decisions
about census enumeration in Yuma County as a
result of that. And Whistler had lots to say. And
his boss was in Phoenix, so it was really a very
strong relationship that we had, including
resolving some problems between the lower
Colorado River Indians and the Kokopas. The
Kokopas occupied a very small reservation of
about 300 acres, located along
the edge of the Yuma Mesa on the southwest part of
Yuma. That, plus some experiences that Wisner had
when he went up to work in northern Arizona on the
Navajo reservation in dealing with the Indian
tribes really gave me a much greater appreciation
for some of the problems of the American Indian
when the Indians themselves were both
experiencing the need to move themselves as well
as being confronted with urban expansion onto
reservation lands. And of course, in Arizona, New
Mexico, California, Nevada, this has become much
more of a serious issue. In Oklahoma? Yeah. Well,
in Oklahoma, except the reservations in Oklahoma
are so few. But when you get to the Arizona, you have
these tremendous. But the one in Tulsa is not.
Right. That's right. So that was perhaps one of the
other highlights. The third being that we were
able to get airport zoning regulations adopted in
Yuma County to protect the field there at Yuma,
which was also jointly used initially by Army and
then by Marine Corps as a Marine Corps auxiliary
air station. What happened to the freeway debate
between the two state agencies? Actually, the two
state agencies were in very good agreement with
each other. The problems were the conflicts
between the general issue of federal government
and and treaty lands that the Indians held, and the
concerns that the local community had about
access to and from the freeway. And the building of
that route ultimately followed pretty much what
the planning staff had concurred with with
respect to the highway location. Did that go north
of the territorial prison? It went. Well, OK, the
territorial prison is at the northeast corner of
downtown. And it went alongside the territorial
prison just to the east of that, swept along the
Mesa edge overlooking the Yuma Valley,
overlooking the Gila Valley.
to the east of the main part of Yuma. Really, Yuma
sits kind of like a pointed. The north part is the
point of a triangle, the south part being the
bottom side of the triangle. And that's the
southern end. And the town stretches off to the
east. And the college site for the community
college was located off to the east of downtown
about four to five miles east along the edge of the
Mesa and at an access point to the freeway. Then the
freeway had to cross the Gila River on a bridge.
Yes, well actually across the Colorado, the Gila
already had spilled into the Gila, into the
Colorado River.
So those were perhaps the three principal things
there. We did some work in northern part of Yuma
County and Quartzsite and in Parker, but that area
has since
been separated off from about three quarters away
north from Yuma up the Yuma Gunnery Range and Yuma
Proving Grounds, which is the hot weather proving
ground, Fort Churchill and Canada being the cold
weather proving grounds for the Defense
Department. And the northern part now is La Paz
County. Fort Churchill is on Hudson Bay, isn't it?
Yes, right. Where the polar bears are. Right. And
so the men would get transferred and their
families from Fort Churchill in the winter to Yuma
in the summer. No. That's unfair. One extreme to
the other. It would have been bad the other way, but
they didn't see it that way. But during that time,
we had good cooperation with the people at Yuma
Proving Ground, which was basically
Army-operated for the Defense Department. and
with the Marine Corps Auxiliary Air Station
staff, did not have a lot of contact with them, but
where there was an essential contact, I must say it
was always very, very positive. I never had a
negative experience with any of the military
personnel. The same was true at Bergstrom Air
Force Base in Austin. Never had a negative
situation there.
The other aspect of being in Yuma was that I also had
a chance to help in getting a planning program.
I guess you might say getting some blood put into
the planning program in Nogales, Arizona. The
planning director had been hired. He did not know
much of what it was all about, and so he got steered
to me, and I sat and worked with him for several days
and then went and visited him in Nogales and tried
to help him get things set up there. Nogales,
Arizona is very small. Nogales, Sonora is fairly
large by comparison. The Arizona side is 6,000 or
8,000, maybe 10,000 people. The Sonora side was in
the neighborhood of 60,000 to 80,000 people.
And being a port of entry and all of that, it had its
own problems, very unique to that area. But having
worked in El Paso and having grown up in Tucson and
having lived in Yuma, I had an appreciation of the
border influences. And frankly, I always found
that very enjoyable. The Hispanic culture I find
very adaptable to my thoughts. When you were in
Yuma then, you had contact with San Luis. Did not in
official capacity. It was only to the extent that
might have some contact with people who had
business there or were going back and forth.
That's all. Very little. Did have some contact
with the planning staff in El Centro, California.
El Centro was very, very small. And I think they had
one planner on board and one draftsman or
something like that. And that was it. And that was
just minimal contact over there. Had some contact
with planning staff in San Diego.
That was a completely different ballgame. So
really, we weren't talking the same thing. One
interesting fact. At the time, in 1960 or 59,
Arizona put in a requirement that all boats must be
licensed. Statewide requirement, such as we have
in Texas. time there were 49,000 people in total in
Yuma County, the city and all the towns and all the
unincorporated area. When the initial
registration period was completed, there were
over 10,000 votes registered in Yuma County. You
would never believe it. Out in the desert. But it
was the influence of the Colorado River. And in
fact, a man lived down the street from us who was the
commander. He was a reserve Coast Guard officer,
and he was the commander of the Coast Guard Reserve
Flotilla that literally patrolled the Colorado
River from Yuma up to, well, about to Parker or
Bullhead City. a distance of about 150 miles. Was
there much recreation voting that went down to the
Gulf of California? Not much going that way, no. It
was, in fact, the major problems regionally, the
major problems at that time centered on the
conflict between the US and Mexico with respect to
the question of water quality. for the discharge
of water into the Colorado River. Arizona,
Colorado, Utah were meeting the requirements in
terms of quantity, but there was so much of a
problem with the leaching of the ground that the
salt content or the carbonate content was getting
so high that in Mexico, below San Luis, there were
farms that literally had been extremely
productive that were being wiped out because of
the high salt content in the water. And this was
becoming a very, very sore point for Mexico in its
relations with the US. And that, in turn, prompted
some actions on the part of the
authorities at Boulder Dam and Hoover Dam and at
the other dams on the Gila River to release larger
quantities of water to thin out the salt content
going downstream. Plus began, that was the
beginning perhaps of some real effort on the part
of the farming community in both the Gila Valley
and the Yuma Valley to find some better ways to
utilize the water that they were taking from the
river and from underground. A lot of water was
coming from underground sources.
The other remaining highlight of the experience
in Yuma, though, was in the Welton Mohawk Valley.
There were a number of farmers that were very much
concerned with planting. They believed in it.
They supported it through conservation
districts. In fact, many of them lived in Yuma,
even though they owned places out in the Welton
Mohawk, 60 to 80 miles away from town, and would
commute daily out there to do their farming. Of
course, there were people who lived in the town of
Welton a relatively small number. Terrible
drinking water. And how people put up with it, I
don't know. But anyway, they lived there. Some of
them did. And I went out a couple of times and met
with the people there, as I did with the farm
community and some of the mining people. And when I
say mining people, I'm talking about hard rock
miners that came out of the hills up in the
Quartzside area in the northeastern part of Yuma
County. And those folks believed in planning.
They were rugged individuals, but they saw the
need to get together on major issues such as water
conservation, water usage, depletion of soil,
highway location issues, things of that sort. And
so they were very positive. And I always could look
to them if I had a real problem out in that area to get
some good, solid, and very realistic answers to
the issues, the problems that were at hand. So I
count that experience as being a very positive
one. Then in 1962, I left Yuma, went to the city of
Phoenix as assistant planning director under
John Beatty, who was planning director, chief of
our advanced planning section, was Gordon
Wagner, who then moved to Florida. I don't
remember which city. This was several years after
I had left there. And I was in Phoenix from 1962 to
1964. Others
of the key staff that I dealt with were Jim Talley in
the subdivision area,
who was very astute and a good
operator. Jim Talley, who was in zoning and
especially on special use permits and things of
that sort, very good. Bob Johnson, who was
responsible for the subdivision planning
process, and again conducted an operation which I
was able to contribute a little to in much the same
way that we had managed to do in Austin. So there was
some bridging across between the experience in
Austin and what we were able to do in practice in
Phoenix. One of the things that occurred,
which was rather interesting, was that through
the zoning operation, and we had zoning hearings
every week, either commission hearings or
council hearings, with usually somewhere in the
neighborhood of 15 to 25 cases a week, which was a
terrible load. One of the things we were able to do
was to regularize some of the hearing process John
Beatty and I worked on this. And through the
assistance of people like Bob Johnson and Jim
Talley, we were able to bridge over some of these
special use permit problems which went to the
Board of Adjustment and the zoning issues. And
one area of practice that I first saw in Phoenix was
the idea of placing signs on the property and near
the property under either zoning change
consideration or board of adjustment
consideration on a variance or special
exception. Signs about 18 by 24 inches or a little
larger. And these signs were color coded. I recall
blue for Board of Adjustment, pink for zoning, and
later on I brought that idea to Fort Worth and it has
since spread elsewhere in the state of Texas as a
very practical way of letting the public know what
was going on because legal ads generally don't
take care of the real need. There were also some
things we did there in the notices including the
sending of frequently a map along on the zoning
notice to people so they could physically see what
the property was as it was going to be considered.
Gordon Wagner in the advanced planning section
was in a dual role, not only responsible for that
operation in the city's domain, but also worked
with two fellows, Gary Bourne, who was on loan from
the Public Works Department, and another
individual whose name I cannot, first name I can't
recall, his name was Johnson, on loan from Traffic
Engineering, and the three of them formed, were
formed into what was called the Transportation
Planning Team under the direction of Ed Hall, who
at one time had been Traffic Engineer for the city
and or county of San Diego. And Ed had come over for
the purpose of trying to help determine the
policies that should be established in the plan
for transportation in Phoenix, and by greater
implication, Maricopa County. And from what I've
seen in Phoenix, they could use a lot of
transportation. Right. And that has been one of
the problems, because the proposals that they
came up with consistently got rejected by the
politicos. The Papago Freeway was one that they
worked on very hard, did lots of documentation on,
and it fell virtually on deaf ears. Council
members supported it, but the public did not. And
council members were never able to convince the
citizens at large that this was a good thing to do.
And when it would get into the question of location
and design and so on, and they'd have local area
hearings, which occurred after I left,
neighborhoods would rise up in opposition. We
want a freeway, but not next to our neighborhood.
And so many of the ideas that were developed just
went by the boards, I'm sad to say. However, what I
did see there was something that I think every city
ought to do, and that is to set aside a group of
people with the full backing of top management, as
a coordinating body in the field of
transportation planning. They were able to do
things. And even though your comment is well
taken, Phoenix needs a lot to be done. But what you
see today on the ground, what has been
accomplished, in part has been accomplished
because of the Arizona State Highway Department.
But in large measure, even these rather
mechanistic kinds of changes that have been made
were accomplished simply because of that
transportation planning team. It was the first
time that you really got three departments with
key personnel working together, battling out
ideas, hashing out this, hashing out that,
deciding these are the hardcore issues, here are
decent alternatives, presenting those to their
department heads, and those department heads, in
turn, presenting them to the city manager and the
city council.
It meant a lot of study, a lot of investigation, a
lot of time by people who had the intellectual
background, the knowledge base to deal with the
things. But what was lacking was somebody, and I
think this is often a fault in city in the council
manager plan of government, somebody who was in
the role of the community relations expert. They
had the technical know-how, and they had the
community needs assessment know-how. They just
didn't have anybody to go out and explain to the
public at large, here's why you need to do all these
things. Yes, it is going to hurt this area. But
here's the benefit for the total city. Yeah, they
need someone to point out the consequences of the
various alternatives. And if we do this, then this
is going to happen. And this will be good, and this
will be not so good. But I think this is the one thing
that I saw as a function of city government, which
frankly, I was very pleased with. I would say the
one thing. Disappointment, though, was that Ed
Hall, as the coordinator or the person in charge of
the team, and he had other responsibilities too,
but as the coordinator of that team, he had a rather
brusque manner, a know-it-all manner that
projected to the public that they weren't going to
be listened to. And that was too bad because Ed was
really relying on those fellows who had lived
there. They knew the community. They knew the
problems. They were good technicians. They were
very professional. Two of them were registered
professional engineers. Gordon had been at it for
five, six, seven years. He was a Harvard planning
program graduate. Every reason. in the world to
think that things could have come out right. In
fact, I think he had spent some time in Minneapolis
also on the planning staff, as I recall. I'm not
sure of that.
That's a tough agency to get into. Up there? Yes.
Once you're in that agency, no one leaves. Well, he
had left for health reasons. Literally, he and his
wife both had health problems and so on. moved to
Phoenix. But I was in Phoenix two years, and
frankly I left because the opportunity arrived to
work under a city manager that had been in
Cookingham's backyard, as it were, trained under
LP Cookingham in Kansas City.
That was the primary reason I departed in 64 to move
to Fort Worth. I can't say really with respect to
the Phoenix experience that there was much else
other than my involvement in trying to regularize
some of the subdivision planning process and to
help a couple of community interests One, I did sit
as the planning director's representative to the
high-rise study committee, which included a
number of people who were interested in the
development of high-rise buildings. In fact, the
chairman of the committee was a man from Colwell
Banker who had moved over from Los Angeles just six
months before he became chairman of that
committee, a very astute person.
In fact, he one time described Phoenix like a
Hollywood set, all false fronts.
For somebody coming from Los Angeles and
Hollywood, I thought that was a very
understandable statement. But I guess the only
other experience that I had there that I can really
look to as being a particularly profitable one was
in working with, again, Parks and Recreation
Department on some of their rather detailed
problems, on-site location problems.
Was there any concern over air pollution at that
time? Not in Phoenix at that time, no. The concerns
were more water Phoenix, in fact, experienced
flooding there on the river,
pretty extensive flooding, in fact, between Sky
Harbor Airport and downtown, although downtown
is not really at the river. But there were those
problems, and we also had some needs for
coordination with the county in the work that was
being done out in the suburban areas.
That was fair to Midland cooperation. There was
always some conflict, though, beneath the
surface between John Beatty and the county
planning director. Both of them were pretty
long-term entrenched in their positions. the
county planning director's name i can't think of
right now don well anyway whatever uh but i knew
that john baity was going to be around for a good
long time so i decided it was better to just depart
although he when i left we were on extremely good
terms and he encouraged me to stay so i i could have
stayed there indefinitely but i wanted a chance to
work in a in a little different management
situation in fact the manager in phoenix at that
time was the brother of the man